.TH VLOCK-PLUGINS 5 "29 May 2026" "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
vlock-plugins \- plugin support for vlock
.SH DESCRIPTION
If vlock-main(8) is compiled with plugin support its default features are very
limited: it can only lock the current session and ask for authenticiaton.
However it is possible to extend this functions through plugins.  These plugins
are loaded when vlock-main starts and can provide hooks that are called at
certain points during the lifetime of the vlock-main process.
.PP
.SH "DEFAULT PLUGINS"
The following plugins are provided when installing vlock with default options:
.PP
.B all
.IP
This plugin locks all sessions by disabling console switching.  It is also
loaded when giving the \fB-a,--all\fR option to vlock(1).

.PP
.B new
.IP
This plugin switches to a new virtual console before disabling console
switching through the "all" plugin.  It is also loaded when giving the
\fB-n,--new\fR option to vlock(1).
.PP
.B nosysrq
.IP
Linux only.  This plugin disables the Linux SysRQ mechanism before the console
switching is locked by the "all" plugin.  It is also loaded when giving the
\fB-s,--disable-sysrq\fR option to vlock(1).
.PP
.SH "SCREEN SAVER PLUGINS"
On Linux the following screen saver plugins are also built and installed by
default.  A screen saver runs while the console is locked: it starts when you
press [ESC], after the \fB-t,--timeout\fR period of inactivity (see vlock(1)),
or immediately when \fB-S,--saver\fR is given.  Pressing the wake key brings up
the password prompt.
.PP
.B cmatrix
.IP
Displays falling "Matrix" characters.  Its color is configurable; see
CONFIGURATION below.
.PP
.B train
.IP
Displays an animated steam locomotive.
.PP
.SH "ADDITIONAL PLUGINS"
The following plugins are only available if explicitely selected at build time:
.PP
.B caca
.IP
This plugin runs a random libcaca screensaver when the screen is locked.
.SH CONFIGURATION
Screen saver behavior is controlled through the JSON configuration file
described in vlock(1) (\fI~/.config/vlock/config.json\fR) or the equivalent
environment variables.  The relevant keys are:
.PP
.B general.wake_key
.IP
Which key dismisses the screen saver: \fBany\fR (the default), \fBenter\fR,
\fBspace\fR or \fBbackspace\fR.  Maps to \fBVLOCK_WAKE_KEY\fR.
.PP
.B modules.cmatrix.color
.IP
Color of the cmatrix saver: \fBgreen\fR (the default), \fBred\fR, \fBblue\fR,
\fBwhite\fR, \fByellow\fR, \fBcyan\fR, \fBmagenta\fR, \fBblack\fR or
\fBrainbow\fR.  Maps to \fBVLOCK_CMATRIX_COLOR\fR.
.PP
.B modules.cmatrix.bold
.IP
Bold level of the cmatrix saver: \fB0\fR none (the default), \fB1\fR partial or
\fB2\fR all.  Maps to \fBVLOCK_CMATRIX_BOLD\fR.
.PP
.B modules.train.random
.IP
If true, the train saver randomizes its vertical start position on each pass.
Maps to \fBVLOCK_TRAIN_RANDOM\fR.
.PP
A complete example (note the commas between entries; if the file is not valid
JSON it is ignored entirely):
.PP
.RS
.nf
{
  "general": { "wake_key": "any" },
  "modules": {
    "cmatrix": { "color": "rainbow", "bold": 2 },
    "train":   { "random": true }
  }
}
.fi
.RE
.SH WRITING PLUGINS
For information about writing plugins see the PLUGINS file in the vlock source
distribution.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR vlock (1),
.BR vlock-main (8)
.SH AUTHORS
Frank Benkstein <frank-vlock@benkstein.net>
